[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> I think for some
of us to wake up,
we need a wake-up call.
And in 1986, I got the call.
I was in a triathlon in
Palm Springs, California.
And I was on the biking
portion of the race.
And I was making a turn.
And there was a police
officer on the corner.
And he was pointing to
me to make the turn.
But he had his back to
the oncoming traffic.
So I was passing two
cyclists on the corner.
And when I made the turn,
a four-wheel drive vehicle
going pretty fast catapulted
me out of my bike.
When I landed, I broke
six vertebrae in my spine.
And when you land in
a vertical position,
the compressive force takes
the columns of the vertebrae
and flattens them.
So I had compressed
six vertebrae.
But when you compress
those vertebrae,
the volume of that mass
has to go somewhere.
And it went back
against my spinal cord.
When my body landed, it
kind of whipped forward.
And the top vertebrae out
of the six that were broken
was more than 60% collapsed.
And the arch that the
spinal cord passed through
had broken like a pretzel.
So I had multiple
compression fractures.
I had bone fragments
on a spinal cord.
And I had the neural arch of
the 8th thoracic vertebrae
compressing the cord.
And I was in a little
bit of trouble.
And I had four
opinions from four
of the leading surgeons
in Southern California.
And a typical surgery
for that type of injury
is called the
Harrington rod surgery.
And they do a
complete laminectomy
of the back parts
of your vertebrae.
And they cut them
all, back parts, off.
And then they screw in these
long stainless steel rods.
And in my case, it was
from the base of my neck
to the base of my spine.
They're we're going to
fuse my entire spine to try
to cantilever and pull the
bone fragments off the cord
and open up room
for a spinal cord
to flow up and down to the body.
And I think if it was
anybody else that I
had seen an X-ray for
or a CAT scan or an MRI,
I probably would've recommended
the Harrington rod surgery.
But this was me.
And I wasn't so quick
to make that decision,
because I thought that
I would be spending
the rest of my life in pain
or at least on medications
or partially handicapped.
And so I decided
against the surgery.
And, of course, when you go
against convention like that,
you're always considered
foolhardy and insane.
But I was willing to weigh
what I knew as in my studies
against what I didn't know.
And I was willing
to take a chance
and see if I could heal
myself without having
any surgical intervention.
Of course, they thought I
had post-traumatic stress
disorder--
I hit my head-- and that
I was not making any sense
or I wasn't being reasonable.
But I just had this thought, you
know, I'm not going anywhere.
I'm not doing anything.
I'm laying face down.
I had some neurological
problems, of course.
And I just thought, you
know, the power that
made the body heals the body.
And this vitalistic
intelligence that's
giving us life on a
moment-to-moment basis
is a consciousness.
And consciousness
is an awareness.
And awareness is
paying attention.
It's an intelligence.
And it has an amazing will.
It has an unlimited mind.
And it's loving us in the life.
And I thought, well, if my
will could match its will,
if my mind could match its
mind, and my love for life
could match its
love for life, maybe
I could make contact
with it, give it a plan,
give it a template,
give it a design.
And when I was happy
with that design,
I knew that I couldn't
do the healing.
So I would surrender my
creation to a greater mind
and just see what the autonomic
nervous system could do.
So it sounds really easy.
But I think that when
we're in crisis or trauma,
we tend to focus on what we
don't want to have happen
instead of what we do
want to have happen.
So I made a deal with
myself that I was going
to reconstruct my entire spine.
And I wasn't going to let any
thought slip by my awareness
that I didn't want
to experience.
And so I went through about six
or seven weeks of total hell
because I couldn't get my mind
to do what I wanted it to do.
I'd start off reconstructing
the vertebrae in my spine.
And then the next
thing you know,
I'd be thinking about
living the rest of my life
in a wheelchair.
And I'd become conscious
that I was focusing
on what I didn't
want to have happen
instead of what I did
want to have happen.
Then I'd start from the
very beginning again.
And I reconstruct my spine.
And then I'd be thinking
about should I sell my home?
Should I sell my practice?
And all the people
in my life were
telling me to sell everything.
But if I accepted the
belief on some level
that I would be
able to walk again,
I should never sell my
home and sell my practice.
And so no one could
relate with me.
And I think that's the beginning
of the dark night of the soul
when nobody gets you but you.
And you're crossing
a river of change,
and you're weighing
what you know
against what you don't know.
And you realize nobody
has the answers but you.
So in those six weeks, it
would take me 2 and 1/2
hours to reconstruct my spine.
And at the end of
about six weeks,
beginning of the seventh week, I
went through the entire process
without losing my focus.
And it was like hitting a
tennis ball in the sweet spot.
Something clicked for me.
And from that point on,
everything got easier.
I was able to do what I
was doing in 2 and 1/2
hours in 45 minutes.
Little did I know that
I was firing and wiring
circuits in my brain
and at the same time,
I was increasing my ability to
pay attention and stay present.
And so when I started
noticing those strong changes
in my body--
the numbness went away.
The pain went away.
I started having
more motor function--
I started to correlate what
I was doing inside of me
with the effects I was
producing outside of me.
And the moment I was able to
correlate that connection,
I did it with more passion,
more sincerity, more enthusiasm,
instead of dreading going
through the process.
And that was the switch for me,
because from that moment on,
my body started to respond
to my mind very quickly.
And they told me that I'd
probably never walk again.
They told me that I
would have to live
in a body cast for a year.
And that I'd be
handicapped in some way.
And was back on my feet in
a little less than 10 weeks.
I was back training at 12 weeks.
And to this day I really
have no pain in my spine.
And I just made a
deal with myself.
In those lonely
nights, you know,
I thought if I'm ever
able to walk again,
I promised myself
that I'll spend
the rest of my life studying
the mind-body connection
and mind over matter.
And that's what I've
been doing since 1986.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Actually, it was
an 83-year-old woman--
>> Was it really?
>> Going 55 miles an hour.
She shouldn't have even
been on the course.
And she didn't even
know that she hit me.
So my bicycle shot about
10 feet in the air.
And the truck kept coming.
And I just grabbed
onto the bumper.
And she dragged me down
the road about 30 yards.
And then she stopped short.
And I just rolled down the road.
I mean, there's an elaborate
story that goes along with it.
I mean, just I had one side of
my body was complete road rash.
When I woke up the next
morning from the injury,
I was stuck to the sheets.
My whole body was-- they had
to come with spray bottles
and spray the sheets and
slowly peel them off me.
And I had gravel all in
my-- it was pretty crazy.
But I never had
any anger at all.
I mean, because I knew
that on some level
that this was my initiation.
And in order for
us to be initiated,
we have to be challenged.
And I'm so glad
that it happened,
because I would
never be where I am
today or doing what I'm doing.
And I'd also created a level
of humility and understanding
for me that I think that
I needed at the time.
And it just changed me.
And the challenge is,
of course, after you're
initiated like that, you
step back into your life
and you can't relate
with anybody anymore.
I mean, what was I going
to be unhappy about?
I mean, I duff a golf shot.
And I was like beautiful day.
I just happy to be
alive and standing up.
So in a sense, that sparked
an interest in something else.
I wanted to know
what happened to me.
I wanted to know if anybody
else understood this.
I wanted to know the
science behind it.
And in no science could
I find the explanation
in the old models of science.
I had to start looking at
the quantum model of reality
and start looking
at epigenetics.
I had to start looking
at neuroplasticity,
psychoneuroimmunology,
neuroendocrinology.
I had to piece together
a model of understanding.
And at the same
time, it stopped me
enough to ask bigger
questions, like who am I?
What am I doing here?
What's my purpose in life?
What happens when we die?
Is it really about success?
What is it about?
And that started
my inward journey.
And asking those
big questions, I
think that you have to open
up doors of possibility
and look to see for answers
that aren't based in tradition
or religion or culture.
I think that those
languages are dated.
And I think science is
the contemporary language
of mysticism.
I think science is what
demystifies the mystical.
And all of those
new sciences point
the finger at possibility.
And for me, I understand
now how it happened.
And so what happened after
that I retreated from my life.
I left Southern California.
I moved to the
Pacific Northwest.
And I just disconnected, sold
everything, sold my practice,
and really just started
to study and really try
to piece it together.
And then I got interested
in spontaneous remissions.
And I started saying, anybody
else have these conditions?
And so I traveled to
17 different countries
and interviewed hundreds
and hundreds of people
that were diagnosed
with a medical condition
they were treating
conventionally or
unconventionally.
They were staying the
same or getting worse
and all of a sudden
they got better.
And I wanted to know
what the cause was
that produce that effect.
And so I assembled
four basic principles,
which stood right in alignment
with what happened to me
and wrote a book.
And that book kind of was the
science of changing your mind
and how this all
happens and kind of gave
the principles of those
four specific relative
commonalities.
But then the next part of
me was like, OK, well, I
understand now that
it happens to people
and they weren't mystics.
They weren't spiritual.
Some of them, you
know, ate meat.
I mean, they're just all--
smoke cigarettes.
It was just no commonality
other than the fact
that there was an element
of mind involved in it.
So I thought, if I know the
principles, it happened to me,
and these people have
similar understandings,
can I reproduce it?
And so that's when I started
to teach the practical aspect
and to see if we're able
to reproduce those changes.
And I think for the first year,
we didn't see many changes.
And I don't know if I
wasn't saying it well enough
or it was just the
consciousness at the time.
But after that
first year, people
started to lock in and
start really applying it.
And I have to say that,
the common people are
doing the uncommon.
And they're healing themselves.
Once they understand
the what and the why,
the how gets a lot easier.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Well, I'll answer
the question pretty much
on a couple of different levels.
I think that when we talk
about anxiety and depression,
anxiety and depression on
a functional brain scan
looks exactly the same.
Anxiety is when we are
knocked out of balance.
And when we are knocked
out of homeostasis
or we're knock
out of balance, we
turn on what's called
a stress response.
And when the stress
response is turned on,
we mobilize enormous amounts
of the body's resources
for some threat in our
external environment.
We turn on that sympathetic
nervous system, or the fight
or flight nervous system.
When we begin to mobilize
all that energy, of course,
it gives the body a
rush of adrenaline.
And the fear or the anger or
the aggression or the pain
or the sadness that's created
from the long-term effects
of that tend to become a little
bit addictive for people.
Now, they don't know that.
But over time the
addiction to those emotions
connect to people and
problems in their life.
So they use the
people and problems
in their life to reaffirm
an addiction to some emotion
that they don't even
know that they have.
And if they don't
like their life,
they become addicted to the
life they don't even like.
And so just like
an addict that's
addicted to some
substance, when you
have to break that addiction,
of course, there's withdrawals.
And you start having
images and cravings.
And that's exactly
what the brain
does when it's going through
an emotional withdrawal.
So if a person has a
trauma in their life
and it brands them
emotionally, the moment we
feel a change in our
internal chemistry,
we pay attention to what causes
it in our external environment
and the brain takes a snapshot.
And that's called a memory.
The higher the emotional
quotient, the stronger
the long-term memory.
So there's nothing
wrong with that
except that when
we're in survival
and we're living in stress,
we tend to anticipate
that scenario happening again.
And we actually plan
for it unconsciously.
And we begin to select
a future potential.
And we begin to emotionally
embrace that outcome.
Now, here's the challenge.
When you combine a
thought with an emotion.
You're creating a state
of being because thoughts
are the vocabulary of the
brain and feelings are
the vocabulary of your body.
And how you think
and how you feel
creates your state of being.
So the combination of selecting
the worst-case scenario
in your life and
emotionally embracing it
is turning on the stress
response just by thought alone.
Now, when you turn on
the stress response
and you can't turn
it off, now you're
headed for disease,
because no organism
can live in emergency mode
for extended periods of time.
If you're tapping
the body's resources
for some external threat, for
the short-term, that's great.
When the stress is over, the
body turns back to homeostasis.
And, of course, the body
builds its resources again.
But if you keep turning
on that stress response
and you can't turn
it off and you're
mobilizing all this
energy for some threat
in your external
environment, there's
no energy in your
internal environment
for growth and repair.
There's no energy for
long-term building projects.
It's like there's
a war out there,
and you're sending
all the troops out,
and there's no
Homeland Security.
So as stress hormones go up,
immune function goes down.
It's a fact.
And when that happens
melatonin levels go down,
of course, which
means you're not
going to want to sleep
because if there's
a predator out
there, why would you
be vulnerable in the
middle of the night?
You got to stay awake.
So the survival gene switches
on, and we get in trouble.
And so if it's not a
predator that's in the cave
or outside the cave
waiting for you,
which was highly adaptive
thousands of years ago,
but what if it's your co-worker
that's sitting in the cubicle
next to you who you
resent and despise?
Well, that primitive nervous
system that was once adaptive
is now very maladaptive.
But if we can turn on the stress
response just by thought alone,
then as we begin to select that
future worst-case scenario--
and, by the way,
we'll even go, well,
let's make it worse--
well, what if this happens?
What if that happens?
And we start to
develop this model.
And as we hold that
image in our mind,
the body as the
unconscious mind is
beginning to believe it's
living in that future reality
in the present moment.
And the body's getting knocked
out of balance by thought
alone, because it doesn't
know the difference
between the
experience in our life
that produces the
emotion and the emotion
that we create by thought alone.
To the body, it's
exactly the same.
So the redundancy
of holding that
thought, combining
it with the emotion,
creating a state of being
over and over again,
conditions the body to
subconsciously become
the mind of fear.
So now, it's programmed
subconsciously.
So then anxiety is selecting
the worst-case scenario
in your life and
emotionally embracing it
until you condition the body
become the mind of fear.
And if you get
really good at it,
the body is going to have
a panic attack without you.
Try as you may to control
it with your conscious mind,
you cannot.
You programmed it
subconsciously.
The flip side of the
coin is depression.
The person has a
turbulent past or shocked
or betrayed in some way.
And, of course, when they
create that long-term memory,
they're associating some
person, something in some place
in some time with that event.
And so what they don't know
is that after the trauma
the betrayal, every time
they remember the experience
or think about it, they're
producing the same chemistry
in their brain and body as
if the event was occurring.
So now the body as
the unconscious mind
is believing it's in the same
past scenario 50 to 100 times
in one day.
And if those emotions
tend to drive our thoughts
and our thoughts
then produce more
of those emotions
and our emotions
drive more thoughts, now
the repetition of that cycle
conditions the body to
become the mind of depression
or hopelessness
or powerlessness.
So now, the body's
stuck in the past.
The person wants to
get up and do something
and the body says, you
conditioned me to be this way.
And, of course, our
biology, our neurocircuitry,
our neurochemistry, and even our
genes change as a result of it.
So then, the fact that we can
turn on the stress response
just by thought alone--
and it's a scientific fact
that the long-term effects
of the hormones of
stress down regulate
genes that create disease,
then by the very nature
of those chemicals, our
thoughts can make us sick.
So the question is it for our
thoughts can make us sick,
is it possible that our
thoughts can make us well?
And that's the
fundamental question
that needs to be asked,
because so many people have
been conditioned and hypnotized
into believing that they need
something outside of them to
change how they feel inside
of them.
Now, I don't have a problem
with pharmaceuticals.
And I don't have a
problem with medicine.
And I think it really
works for acute conditions.
You break your arm,
you have appendicitis,
acute care is great.
Medical care works
really great when
there is an acute condition.
But chronic conditions
tend to be the challenge,
because chronic conditions
require a lifestyle change.
And if there's no
chemical change that's
going to intervene to
reduce a chronic condition,
a person has to begin to
make different choices.
They have to demonstrate
different behaviors.
They have to create
new experiences.
They have to change
the way they think.
the way they feel.
And that requires them becoming
conscious of how unconscious
they were.
So then chronic stress
and chronic conditions
that require a
lifestyle change then
means then that
the person is going
to have to go from an old
state of mind and body
to a new state of mind and body.
And making that
choice to do that
is going to be
uncomfortable, because you're
stepping outside the known.
And when you're
living in stress,
the unknown is a
very scary place.
So people cling to their fear.
They cling to their guilt.
They cling to their sadness.
They would rather hold on
to that than take a chance
on possibility, because
in survival, or in stress,
it's not a time to create.
It's not a time to imagine.
It's not a time to learn.
It's not a time to
open your heart.
It's not a time to go within.
It's not a time to sit still.
It's a time to run,
to fight, or to hide.
And when that primitive
nervous system is activated
and it switches on for
extended periods of time,
the very nature
of those chemicals
cause us to put a lot of
attention on our body.
When you're being
chased by Mr. Big,
you better make sure you're
paying attention to your body.
When you're in a
survival situation,
all of your attention
is on your outer world
where the danger is.
On the person, thing,
place, we focus
on the matter-- we narrow our
focus on things and people.
We put our attention
our environment.
And when we're living by
the hormones of stress
our attention is on time.
We obsess about time--
the body, the
environment, and time.
And the very nature
of those chemicals
causes our senses to
become heightened.
We become materialists
that have to define reality
with our senses.
And if we can't see it, we can't
hear it, we can't smell it,
we can't feel it, we can't
taste it, it doesn't exist.
So from the quantum perspective,
we're focusing on the particle.
And yet there is a wave of
possibility that we edit out.
So in chronic stress, the reason
that chronic conditions are so
heightened in our
world right now
is because that chronic state
of imbalance of the stress
response becomes
the new balance.
And then the person
then is looking
for things outside of them
to bring themselves back
into balance.
Now, that's OK for
the short term.
But what if your stress
is adding up and adding up
and adding up?
And then all of a
sudden we tend to try
to force outcomes, control
outcomes, predict outcomes,
because we feel powerless.
We are matter, in a sense,
trying to change matter.
And there's only a few
resources that we have.
We compete.
We fight.
We force.
We manipulate.
We deceive.
We do what we can
to get what we need.
And so amazing time in history
right now because people
are beginning to
wake up to the idea
that it's more
important for them
to regulate internal states
independent of the conditions
in their external environment.
And when we begin to
break that conditioning,
that something outside of us
is going to change how we feel
inside of us, we start taking
responsibility for the way we
manage our thoughts, the way
we manage our emotions, ,
the choices we make, the
behaviors we demonstrate,
the experiences we
want and we don't want.
And I think it's
that kind of shift
that begins to bring
people back into balance.
Unfortunately,
people love to wait
for crisis or trauma or
disease or diagnosis or loss
to finally make up
their mind to change.
And my message is why wait?
You can learn and change in a
state of pain and suffering,
or you can learn and change in
a state of joy and inspiration.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> So our research that we've
done just in the last year we
took 120 people.
And we measured their
cortisol levels.
And we measured their immune
system response, a chemical
called IgA, immunoglobulin A.
It's the primary defense
against bacteria and viruses.
It's better than any flu shot.
It's the body's innate mechanism
for internal protection.
So as cortisol levels go up,
as stress hormones go up,
and you're tapping
the body's resources,
immune function goes down.
And that's a scientific fact.
So we took 117 people, and we
measured their cortisol levels
and IgA levels before they
started a 4-day event.
And I said, OK, what
if we teach them how
to create elevated emotions?
Like gratitude, like
joy, like inspiration.
And let's measure what
happens to their heart
to make sure that they're
regulating this state properly.
It turns out when you're
living in fear, when you're
living in resentment,
when you're
living in anger and
impatience, the heart
beats very incoherently.
And the mechanism of
sustained stress over time
causes heart problems.
So when a person
starts to feel more
coherent elevated
emotions, the heart
starts getting very
orderly and very rhythmic.
And it sends a very strong
signal to the brain.
And the person starts to relax.
They start to feel safe.
They start change
their breathing.
They start to
expand their energy.
Everything changes because
the person's falling
into the present moment.
And they're changing
their brainwaves
when they do that from
the vigilant state
of high beta brainwave
patterns when
we're obsessing about
something and trying
to control everything
to beginning
to slow their brainwaves
down into more
of an alpha coherent state.
And that imagination
creative state
is the perfect
state to be in when
we're executing in our life.
So we measured their ability
to create elevated emotions.
And we asked them to sustain
those elevated states
for 10 minutes a day, 3
times a day for about 4 days.
So my thought was, well,
if cortisol levels down
regulate the gene to make
IgA, which is a protein--
and all genes make proteins--
what if an elevated
emotion could up
regulate the gene for IgA
and all of a sudden increase
the IgA levels?
At the end of four days,
we had a 49.5% increase
in immunoglobulin A just by
changing our emotional state.
So now, let's look at
the mechanics of this.
If you're living in the
same emotional state
every single day,
as I said earlier,
your body as the
unconscious mind
is believing in it's in
some environmental condition
because the emotion is the
end product of an experience
in your environment.
Latest research on genes tells
us genes don't create disease.
It's the environment
that signals the gene
to create disease.
Well, an experience
in an environment
produces an emotion.
So it's the emotion
that signals the gene
to either up regulate and
make a healthy protein
or down regulate and
shut a protein off.
So in a matter of
four days, people
are able to up regulate
the gene to increase
their immune function
just by thought alone.
So 10 minutes of
gratitude a day,
the worst thing that
could happen to you
is it could heal you.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Well, it's fascinating that
you can give someone a sugar
pill, a saline injection, or
perform some false surgery
or treatment, and a certain
percentage of those people will
accept, believe, and surrender
to the thought without any
analysis that they're
getting the real substance
or treatment.
And they begin to program
their autonomic nervous system
to make the exact
pharmacy of chemicals
equal to the substance
or treatment they
think they're getting.
So the fundamental
question is, is it
the inert substance,
the placebo,
that's doing the
healing or is it
the body's innate capacity
to heal by thought alone?
So blue pills work
better than red pills.
If you name a pill that
rhymes with something that it
could increase its ability
for, it'll work better.
People will subconsciously
associate with it.
If you name a drug something
that a person can't pronounce,
they'll give their
power away to the drug
and it'll work even better.
They'll be intimidated by it.
If you charge more
for a medication,
it will work better.
And if the doctor's
enthusiastic about it,
it'll work even better.
So that pill, that
sugar pill, works
because a person's
gotten a substance
that they've taken that's
taking away their pain
or it's changed in
their internal state.
The moment they notice
a change in their body,
they pay attention
to what caused it.
And they start to
condition themselves
to rely on that substance.
Give the person the
pill the next day.
Give the person
Conditioning,
conditioning, conditioning.
Then you give them a pill
that looks just like that pill
and it's nothing more
than starch or sugar,
and their body begins to
produce the same chemistry.
So when they get
that pill that's
an inert substance,
if conditioning
is based on the past,
then expectation
is based on the future.
They begin to expect the
same outcome as the past.
And the anticipation
of the event
causes the body
to naturally begin
to make its own chemicals.
So that pill then is a
symbol of possibility.
And the moment that
person gets that pill,
they begin to select the
potential in the quantum field
called getting better.
And a certain percentage
of those people
begin to become optimistic,
excited, inspired, grateful.
And when you combine
a clear intention
with an elevated
emotion, you just
changed your biology from living
in the past, present reality
to living in a future
present reality.
And when a person moves into
that future present reality,
they're in a new state of being.
And that will begin to program
their autonomic nervous system
to make the pharmaceuticals
equal to the substance they
think they're taking.
So the fundamental question
is, do you need a sugar pill?
Do you need a saline
injection to do that?
Or can you combine
a clear intention
with an elevated emotion and
move into a new state of being?
In other words, instead
of selecting a known,
selecting an unknown and
keep revisiting that unknown
until it becomes a known and
your biology begins to change?
And the answer is
absolutely yes.
So my interest was,
OK, so if I understood
the mechanics of
the placebo and how
it works from a
scientific standpoint,
can you teach people to do it?
And the answer is
absolutely yes.
Now, there's some conditions.
For example, in
depression studies,
81% of people that are
in depression study
get better in taking a placebo
or the substance the placebo
works as well as the
antidepressant that the control
group is taking.
So 81% of those
people are making
their own anti-depressants
by thought alone.
You can do a functional
brain scan before.
You do functional
brain scan after.
And you can see visible
changes in their brain.
In other words, it's
not in their mind.
It's in their brain.
But those people took that
placebo for eight weeks.
So every single day, they
were reminding themselves
of that future a reality and
changing their state of being.
And at the end of eight weeks,
they had biological changes.
So there's no panacea,
like you do it once--
although the placebo
sometimes works that way.
And we see that
sometimes in our work--
but if it took eight
weeks for those people
to move into a state of
being every single day
to change their
biology and physiology,
then it may take us eight
weeks to heel ourselves
from depression.
And we just have to stay at
it for that extended period
of time.
And it means then we
would have to break
the conditioning that we
need something outside of us
to do that.
And that's just the belief.
And that's just how
we've been programmed.
Well, I can tell you that
I have no doubt that it's
absolutely possible to do it.
We get emails every single day.
People that were in
chronic pain, people
with rheumatoid arthritis,
people with lupus,
people with depression,
people with anxiety,
people with cancer, people
with rare genetic disorders
that medical science
has no solution for that
have completely
unregulated their genes,
changed their
biological presentation,
and they've healed.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Well, I could probably
talk about that for two hours.
I mean, I start off my book
with this story of a man who
was diagnosed with cancer.
And the doctor gave him a
certain period of time to live.
And when he got the
diagnosis, he said, look,
I just want to live long enough
to make it through Christmas
with my family.
And after that, I don't
care what happens,
but can you keep me
alive to that point?
So they checked his values
and, you know, he was doing OK.
And a week after
the sentence that he
got on how long he would be
living after the diagnosis,
a week later, he passed.
But when they did
the autopsy on him,
he had no cancer, not
even enough to kill him.
So he died by thought alone.
That's how powerful belief is.
But, I mean, you can
take a group of people
that have Parkinson's disease--
and Parkinson's
disease is deficiency
in dopamine in the brain.
When there's not enough
dopamine in the brain,
the upper motor neurons can't
communicate with each other.
And all of a sudden,
the motor neurons cause
a spastic paralysis or tremors.
People with Parkinson's
can't control
that with their conscious mind.
So they did an experiment where
they told these participants
that they had one of the most
powerful new drugs to treat
Parkinson's.
And after the saline injection,
more than 50% of those people,
all of their symptoms went away.
Now, this is the cool
part of the story,
because the doctors that did
the experiment said, well,
that's just the placebo.
And one doctor said,
well, OK well if they're
tremors went away,
is it possible
that they're making
their own dopamine?
So what they did was they
found a radioactive chemical
that fit into the same
receptor sites as dopamine.
So think of receptor
sites as parking spaces.
If the Parkinson's patients
were making their own dopamine
by thought alone, then dopamine
would get to the parking spaces
first.
And when they injected
the radioactive dye,
there would be no
radioactivity in the brain
because dopamine
got there first.
If they weren't making
their own dopamine,
then there'd be a lot
of parking spaces.
And all of a sudden when they
injected the radioactive dye
would fit into those
receptor sites.
And when they imaged the brain,
the brain would light up.
It turns out these
people were making
200 times the amount of
dopamine just by thought alone.
Now, there's a
caveat to the story,
because when those people
returned back to their life,
all of their symptoms came back.
Now, the question is why?
Because when they
saw their caregiver,
when they played chess
with their friends,
when they saw their spouse,
when they slept in the same bed,
the environment began to
remind them by association
who they were as an identity.
And they returned back
to their past biology.
And, of course, then
the next question
is, if the environment
is that strong,
it should be a good
idea every single day
that we change
our state of being
to be greater than
our environment.
So, yes, people
that are treating
for chronic conditions, the
question that I ask them is,
tell me, how long
do you think it took
you to develop this condition?
Tell me the choices
that you made.
Tell me how your
stress levels were.
Tell me about your
past, your traumas.
And they can tell a narrative
that usually is years.
And I always tell them, OK, so
it took you two years or three
years to create this condition.
And you're going to have to
turn this battleship around.
And by turning it
around to uncreate it,
it's going to take
a little time.
So every day, you
have to overcome
some aspect of yourself.
Overcome, overcome, overcome
until you become someone else.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Well, we do a lot of
mental imaging in our work.
And I kind of move past
the word visualization,
because I think it
kind of conjures up
a little bit too much of
a spiritual association.
The word that's used in science
is called mental rehearsal.
And mental rehearsal, there's
two types of mental rehearsal.
There's what's called
internal mental imaging, which
means you're in the scene as the
first person experiencing it.
And then there's called
external mental imaging,
which is you're observing
yourself in the scene.
It turns out that
when you are actually
in the first person and
not the third person,
that action of rehearsing
what you're doing
produces the strong
biological change.
Now, let's talk about this.
You can take a group of
people that have never
played the piano before.
And you can do a functional
brain scan on them.
And then you can teach them
one-handed scales and chords.
And they'll practice those
chords two hours a day
for five days.
At the end of five days,
they grow a whole new set
of circuits on the
opposite side of the brain.
Well, that makes sense.
You learn something new.
Learning is making new
synaptic connections.
You get your body involved
with some instruction, when
you get your body
involved, you're
going to have a new experience.
Experience enriches the brain.
You pay attention to
what you're doing.
You got to pay attention.
And you got to stay present.
And if you repeat it over and
over again, firing and wiring
firing and wiring, you assemble
new networks of neurons
equal to your experience.
And nothing new there.
But you can take
a group of people
and you can have them
close their eyes.
Do a brain scan on them
before their experiment.
Five days later, do
a brain scan after.
And for two hours a
day, they mentally
rehearse playing those
scales and chords.
At the end of five days,
they grow the same amount
of circuits in their brain
as the people actually
physically doing the exercise.
So what's the relevance?
Number one, when
you're truly focused
and you're truly
paying attention,
your brain does not
know the difference
between what's
going on out there
and what's going on in here.
So the thought becomes
the experience.
And the brain looks
like it's been playing
the piano for the
last five days,
but they never lifted a finger.
Now, from a
biological standpoint,
our brains are a
record of the past.
They're an artifact
of everything
we've learned and
experienced to this moment.
When we prime the brain
to change its circuitry
before the experience,
now the brain
is no longer record of the past.
It's now a map to the future.
And so as we warm up those brain
circuits, it's more easy for us
to slip into a
supernatural behavior.
If you take those
people and you set them
from in front of the
piano, and they've never
played the piano
before but they've
been mentally rehearsing
for the last five days,
they'll play those
scales and chords.
Like magic, they
just learned how
to do it just by changing
their internal state.
Take a group of men.
You can have them
close their eyes
and for an hour day mentally
rehearse doing bicep curls.
Over and over again, and they
add an emotional component
called harder,
stronger, more intense.
And they put themselves
in that first person,
internal mental image.
At the end of two weeks,
they have a 13.5 increase
in muscle strength, and they've
never performed the activity.
Now, not only is
the brain changed
to look like the experience
has already occurred,
now the body has changed
by thought alone.
The body looks like
it's been working out
for the last two weeks.
So then, the power of mental
rehearsal, of imaging,
primes the brain and body
to look like the future has
already occurred.
And when you set the
extent of your limit
and you can image what
you can do even further
than what's normal, then you
are stepping into the unknown.
And, of course,
then your body is
going to follow your mind,
because the experience has
already happened.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> In February of
2017, this year,
we did a trial where we
measured 7,500 gene regulations.
And I wanted to
see if our students
by thinking differently,
making different choices,
demonstrating
different behaviors,
creating some novel
experiences, and changing
their emotional state, if they
were able to regulate genes
and to understand why students
in our work heal from cancer,
why they heal from inflammation,
why their bodies begin
to change.
Now, your body is a
protein producing machine.
And proteins are responsible
for the structure of your body
and the function of your body.
And the expression
of proteins really
is the expression of life.
And so in order for every cell
in your body, except red blood
cells, to make a protein,
a gene has to be regulated.
So genes are like
Christmas tree lights.
They're turning on
and off all the time.
When they turn on or when
they become regulated,
they up regulate and make
a they make a new protein.
When they down
regulate, they shut off
and stop making that protein.
So if you're thinking
the same way,
you're making the
same choices, you're
demonstrating the
same behaviors,
you're creating the
same experiences,
producing the same emotions,
you keep the same lights on
and the other lights off.
And now you're headed
for a genetic destiny.
So we found just in our
research that when people really
understand what they're doing
from an internal process
that they could
regulate and change
their genetic expression.
And that's exactly
what happened.
We had a lot of
genes up regulated.
But we had nine very important
genes, and one of them
was the gene to
suppress cancer growth.
Another one was nerve cells
actually regenerating, actually
not just making new
connections, but growing
new neurons as the result
of novel experiences.
In addition to
that, the gene that
makes antioxidants that
creates youth and longevity
was activated.
The gene for stem cells to
become activated and migrate
to an area of damaged
tissue and regenerate
was activated as well.
So I now know that we
can regulate genes.
And when those genes
become regulate,
they make proteins that
begin to heal the body.
So it's not uncommon
then-- the reason
I did the research
was because we
have a lot of
students in our work
that were diagnosed with cancer.
And cancer, of course,
then every time a person
hears the word
cancer and they're
given that diagnosis, the first
emotion that they feel is fear.
And the moment they feel
fear, no new information
can enter their nervous
system that is not
equal to that emotional state.
In other words, they'll
only accept, believe,
and surrender to the thoughts
equal to that emotional state.
So they get the diagnosis
of fear, all of a sudden
their bodies altered internally.
They're looking at the doctor.
They're taking a
snapshot of that moment.
They're creating a
long-term memory.
Every time I think about
what the doctor said,
they're conditioning their body
to become the mind the fear.
They can with all of
their conscious mind,
which is 5% of who we are,
say I'm going to be healthy.
I'm going to be healthy.
I'm well.
And that thought is going to
stop right at the brain stem
and never make it to the body
because it's not in alignment
with our emotional state.
So then people then when they
hear the voodoo curse, when
they get the death sentence
three months to live,
six months to live, nine months
to live, 12 months to live,
that information goes right in.
And it begins the program
their autonomic nervous system
to that outcome.
Now, there's nothing
wrong with that.
The problem is then the person
is at war with themselves
because they're waiting for
the diagnosis to change,
to feel the relief from
the fear and emptiness
that they're experiencing.
And that's separation.
That's lag.
What we now know is that change
of person's emotional state
and teach them how to regulate
those states, not just for five
minutes--
and we have people
that have mastered it,
that can regulate
heart coherence
or an elevated
emotion for an hour.
So think about this.
You change a person's emotional
state from fear to gratitude,
the emotional
signature of gratitude
means it has already happened.
People give thanks when
they get something.
So gratitude is a
state of receivership.
Change a person's state
to a state of gratitude,
then they will accept, believe,
and surrender to the thoughts
equal to that emotional state.
And they begin to program
their autonomic nervous system
into a different destiny.
So that's the easy part.
The challenge is to get
beyond the emotional addiction
of fear, to get
beyond our doubt,
to get beyond feeling terrible
and not doing the work
because we don't feel better
or we don't feel good,
getting beyond the stress
in our life of trying
to manage our world, while
we're facing a health condition.
This is the challenge.
But we had a lady that
is a psychotherapist.
And some years back her husband
went to the tallest building
in Holland.
While she was in the shower, he
left, said goodbye to the kids,
went to the tallest
building in Holland
and jumped off the top of that
building and committed suicide.
She was waiting for her
husband to come home.
She didn't know where he was.
It was a Sunday morning.
She she's reading some
papers in psychology.
The kids are playing.
Police officers come to the
door and they give her the news.
Of course, the moment
she hears the news,
it's a stressful moment.
And the moment she
feels that change
in our internal
chemistry, of course,
she pays attention
to what causes it.
And she creates a
long-term memory.
The children were upset.
She was angry.
She was sad.
She was confused.
She was guilty.
She was-- every single
emotion you can experience,
she went through all the
stress hormone emotions.
And every time she
thought about that event,
she was producing
the same chemistry
in her brain and body.
And, of course, she was
conditioning her body
into the past.
And, of course, when you
have an experience like that,
people in your life treat
you equal to the experience.
And that becomes your identity.
And so you tell the story over
and over again reaffirming it.
And she found out after her
husband committed suicide
that he left her in a very
difficult financial situation,
huge debt, successful attorney.
But she knew nothing about it.
So now her stress
levels go up even more,
because now it's not only is
she facing a suicide or a loss,
but now she's got a lot of debt.
So then over time, she
wakes up one morning
and she's completely
paralyzed from her waist down.
She can't get out of bed.
She can't move.
They rushed to the hospital.
And, of course, she has a
gross inflammation in her body,
but there's no
mechanical problem.
She's in the hospital for
an extended period of time.
She can't feel her legs.
She can't move her legs.
She can't take care of her kids.
She can't work.
Now, she can't pay all
the debts that she has.
Stress levels go up even more.
It took her a couple of
weeks to finally get out
of the hospital.
She still couldn't
walk on one leg.
She walked with a
walker and crutches,
couldn't take care of her kids.
Depression sets in.
Stress levels go up.
A few months later,
she develops all
of these ulcerations in all the
mucous membranes of her body,
her esophagus, her upper gut,
her vagina, her anus, all
her mucous membranes
are ulcerated.
Now she can eat.
And now if you can't eat, you
become chemically imbalanced.
So now she's
emotionally imbalanced.
And now she's
chemically imbalanced.
And she's physically imbalanced
because she's injured.
So a few months
after that, she's
having problems swallowing.
And they find a tumor
right above her stomach.
And she has esophageal cancer.
And the doctor told her that
she had a very short amount
of time to live.
Now, she came to a workshop
that we were doing in Holland.
And I remember the
day she came in
because she came
in with crutches
and she sat in a room of
about 500 people on the side.
And I saw her walker
and her crutches.
Now, she is a psychologist,
psychotherapist.
She is an educated woman.
Got a master's.
She treats conditions.
She could, from a
psychological standpoint,
have the insight of
how it all happened,
but she couldn't change it.
She did one chemotherapy
treatment for the cancer.
And she said it just
about killed her.
And she stopped.
So she came to our event.
And she started doing the work.
And she had a lot of doubt.
And she had a lot of fear.
She didn't feel like doing
her meditation certain days.
But every single day by creating
the elevated emotion combined
with a clear intention and
changing her state of being
and overcoming the
past every single day
in a matter of about a year,
all of her cancer disappeared.
The tumor shrunk.
All the ulcerations on all her
mucous membranes went away.
She has no paralysis, no pain.
She has no depression.
She owns a hospital
now in Holland.
She's one of my executive
corporate trainers.
And she has a new
husband and a great guy.
And he's a successful person.
And she's in love with life.
And so we have people that
heal from cancer quite a bit.
And I'm going to tell you, it
takes an uncompromising world
to do it.
But the beauty behind it is
when she stands on the stage
and she tells her story and
she doesn't look any different
than anybody else--
she's not wearing white.
She's not young and fit.
She's just a common person--
that so many people,
when they hear the story
begin to change their belief
about what's possible.
And because of her
and a few other people
that heal themselves
of ovarian cancer
and a few other big cancers,
when they tell their story,
more and more people are
accepting that it's possible.
And that's how we
change the paradigm.
It's no longer the philosophical
component that does it.
It's the example
of it that does it.
And to me, she is the
living example of truth.
So then so the interesting
thing about that
is that if you ask
her about her past,
she will tell you that it
was the best thing that
ever happened to her.
And if you ask her
about her disease,
she will tell you the disease
lives in the old personality.
I'm literally somebody else.
And just like a person with
multiple personality disorder
that has an allergy to nylon
stockings in one personality
and type 2 diabetes in
another personality,
she literally
became someone else.
And the disease exists
in the old person.
Now, the beauty behind
her is that she understood
that the emotion, if she could
truly be present and hold
an image and rehearse
a future and begin
to create the emotion,
her brain and body
would change from living in the
past to living in the future.
So then if she's feeling
fear every single day,
then she's in the past,
because the moment
she wakes up and
searches for that feeling
and she gets in touch with
that feeling, that feeling is
a record of the past and starts
influencing her thoughts,
then her entire state
of being is in the past.
Every day as she
starts overcoming
those emotions and those
doubts and those thoughts
and attitudes and
hardwired behaviors,
she's changing her
neurocircuitry.
She's changing her chemistry.
She's changing her hormones.
She's even changing her genes.
And because she studied
it and she understood it,
she understood what
she was doing and why,
and the how it got easier.
And she said, which I
thought was so beautiful,
I'm not getting up
from this meditation
until I'm in love with life.
Now to the materialist
who's looking for evidence,
she has no reason to
be in love with life.
She lost her husband.
She was in financial crisis.
She lost her job.
She had no friends.
She couldn't take
care of her kids.
She was paralyzed.
She had cancer.
She had depression.
She had ulcerations.
But she said, I'm going to
teach my body emotionally
what my future is going to feel
like before it's made manifest.
And over time, overcoming,
overcoming, overcoming,
she became someone else.
And I just had dinner with
her in Switzerland last month.
And she said, you know, I'm
so in love with my life.
And I said, of course,
you are, you've
created your life from a place
of being in love with life.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> You know, the challenge
behind all of this is that
people have to understand that
there is a journey that they
have to take.
In other words,
95% of who we are
by the time we're
35 years old is
a set of memorized behaviors,
emotional reactions, beliefs,
perceptions,
attitudes, behaviors
that function like a
subconscious computer program.
95% of who we are is a habit.
And it's programmed in the body.
If you keep doing
something so many times,
the body knows now how to do
it better than your brain.
So if that's 95% of who we
are, the body becomes the mind.
And most of the time
people are unconscious.
So they're unconscious
to the way they think.
They're unaware of how they
act, what they look like.
They're not even
aware of what they're
feeling, because it just
feels like their normal self.
So then to go from the
old self to the new self,
you've got to cross a river.
And stepping into that river,
the hardest part about change
is not making the same choice
as you did the day before.
And the moment you decide
to make a different choice,
get ready, because it's
going to be uncomfortable.
And so then the moment they
step into that river of change,
the body has been
conditioned to be the mind.
The body doesn't
like the uncertainty.
It would rather
cling to its guilt.
It would rather cling to its
unworthiness, to its fear.
So then the moment the body
starts feeling uncomfortable
and it's been conditioned
to be the mind,
it starts sending signals
back to the brain.
And the brain starts
going, you start tomorrow,
this isn't really
going to work for you.
No, it's not the truth.
You're a failure.
You're too much
like your mother.
You'll never change.
This doesn't feel right.
That's the body
trying to unseat us.
And if we respond to that
thought or that voice
as if it's true, that same
thought leads the same choice.
It leads to the same behavior.
It creates the same experience.
It produces the same emotion.
And then we say, oh,
this feels right.
Well, no, that feels familiar.
Going from the old
self to the new self
is the neurological,
is the biological,
is the chemical, the hormonal,
genetic death of that old self.
But we do want to white knuckle
it when we're in that unknown,
we're in that void.
The question is, what thoughts
do you want to fire and wire
in your brain?
What do you want to put
your intention behind?
What behaviors do you
want to demonstrate today
in one lifetime?
The act of rehearsing
your behaviors
begins to install the
circuits in your brain,
priming your brain
for the future.
And if you keep installing the
hardware over and over again,
the hardware is going to
become a software program.
And who knows, you
may start thinking
like an unlimited person.
You may start feeling and
behaving like a healthy person.
And then, of course, can you
teach your body emotionally
what that future
is going to feel
like before it's made manifest?
That means you don't wait for
your healing to feel wholeness.
You don't wait for your
wealth to feel success.
You don't wait for the
mystical moment to feel ah.
That's the old model of
reality of cause and effect--
waiting for something
outside of us
to change how we
feel inside of us.
And when we feel
better inside of us,
we pay attention to
whatever cause it.
But what if it doesn't happen?
Then we spend the
majority of our life
in lack waiting
for it to happen.
The quantum model of reality
is about causing an effect.
The moment we start feeling
whole, our healing begins.
The moment we in
awe of life, we're
going to have a mystical
experience, the moment we
feel worthy and abundant,
our wealth is coming.
When we feel empowered, we're
moving towards our success.
The moment we're in love with
life, in love with ourselves,
our world changes.
That's causing an effect.
So the model then of
change is becoming
conscious of our
unconscious self.
And the word
meditation literally
means to become familiar with.
So if 95% of who we are is
hard wired and conditioned,
you got to start thinking about
what you've been thinking about
and change it.
You got to become
aware of how you act
and what your habits are.
So familiar, so conscious
of it, that you would never
go unconscious again.
And then you gotta look
at those emotions that
keep you anchored to
the past and decide,
do these emotions
belong in my future?
And I think that most
people try to create
a new personal reality
as the same personality.
It doesn't work.
We literally have to
become someone else.
So then as you cross
the river and you say,
what thoughts do I want to
fire and wire in my brain?
What behaviors do I
want to demonstrate?
If you keep firing and wiring
those circuits over and over
again, it's going to begin
become familiar to you.
And if you keep cultivating
elevated emotional states,
just like you cultivate
fear or guilt,
if you keep doing
that enough times,
it's going to begin to
become familiar to you.
And over time, you
change and transition.
And so we use the
model of meditation
because the whole
purpose of meditation
is to get beyond
the analytical mind.
And what separates the conscious
mind from the subconscious mind
is the analytical mind.
So then we have ways in
different meditations
to teach our students how
to change their brainwaves,
from that high
alert beta brainwave
state that switches on when
a person's in chronic stress
to be able to
regulate and change
their brainwaves, to teach
them how to go from focusing
on matter and objects and
things to focusing on nothing,
to focusing on space, to
go from a narrow focus
to an open focus.
And when that occurs,
brainwaves begin to slow down.
And if they're sensing
space and they're not
analyzing and thinking,
different compartments
of the brain that
were once subdivided
because the hormones of
stress because they're
shifting their attention to
their kids, to their wife,
to their job, to their
problems, to their cell phone,
to their emails, it's
one of those things
is a neurological
network in our brain.
Keep doing that, the brain
starts firing incoherently.
When the brain's incoherent,
we're incoherent.
When the brain isn't working
right, we're not working right.
So by regulating and changing
brainwaves and teaching
our students how to
do it, in time then
the brain starts to synchronize.
If you're no longer
analyzing and thinking,
the autonomic nervous
system steps in,
which is its job is to
create order and balance,
as your brainwaves
change, you begin
to make contact and go from beta
brainwaves to alpha brainwaves.
And when that occurs, all of a
sudden different compartments
of the brain that
were once subdivided
start to synchronize.
And what syncs in the
brain, links in the brain.
And all of sudden, we
start feeling more whole.
And it's the autonomic
nervous system
then that starts to regulate
balance and in the neocortex,
and we start feeling
more in balance.
So to regulate and change
the brainwaves, when
you go from beta
to alpha, you're
moving right beyond
the analytical mind.
Now, you're in the
operating system
where those programs
exist and where
true change can take place.
And so our students can change
their brainwaves in 4 seconds,
in 5 seconds, in 9
seconds, in 13 seconds.
And it's not like a
race to get there.
It's just a skill.
They just know how to do it.
And so when they get
into the operating system
and they change those
associations or those emotions
or those habits into more
productive ones, of course,
when they present
themselves to the world,
there is some change
in the process.
So we use the model of
meditation as a means to do it.
And there's different
meditations that we use,
of course.
And we like our students
to do the work every day.
And our students don't go, oh,
gosh, I got to meditate today.
They've had so many instrumental
effects because of it
that they look forward to
it, because not only does
their biology change,
but their life changes.
And I think that's the
benefit, because then
by changing ourselves
and presenting ourselves
to the world, of
course, we give people
permission to do the same.
And the side effect of that is
we begin to change the world.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> So we have three
types of stress--
physical, chemical,
and emotional.
Physical stress, of
course, is trauma,
injuries, accidents, falls.
Chemical stress is flus,
bacterial infections,
blood sugar levels, hangovers.
Emotional stress-- family
tragedies, second mortgages,
single parenting, 401(k)s.
All of those things knock the
brain and body out of balance.
So if we have three
types of stress
that knock the body
out of balance,
then there's three ways
to create balance back
in the body--
physically, chemically,
and emotionally.
In 31 years of
practice, I can tell you
when you get two
out of those three
in order with a
chronic condition,
the majority of time the
third one always comes around.
Person is physically out of
balance and emotionally out
of balance, if you get them
more physically in balance
and emotionally in
balance, they're
going to be more
chemically in balance.
You get someone more
chemically balanced,
more emotionally
balanced, they're
going to be more
physically balanced.
And so then it's a combination
of all those things
with chronic conditions.
And so whether the person wants
to pick the right foods to keep
her body chemically in balance,
take the right supplements,
work on their emotional
state, of course,
they're going to become
more physically balanced.
Person starts working out
and doing yoga and doing
explosive exercise,
whatever it is,
and they're making the
proper food choices
and keeping their body
chemically in balance,
they're going to start feeling
more emotionally in balance,
which is going to help them make
better choices for the physical
and chemical state.
And I think that's
how we climb out
of the hole with
chronic conditions.
[MUSIC PLAYING]